Software Engineering Masterclass - Digital Forensics

Resources (Currently Being Used):
	  Talks/Videos:
		T1)	A Geeks Guide To Digital Forensics, Google Talk, Andrew Hogg - https://youtu.be/rPd-HiEvhhw - Last Accessed: 17/01/2018@18:56
	  Books:
		B1)	File System Forensic Analysis - Brian Carrier - Publisher: Addison Wesley; 01 edition (17 Mar. 2005) - ISBN-13: 978-0321268174
		B2)	The Art of Memory Forensics: Detecting Malware and Threats in Windows, Linux, and Mac Memory - Michael Hale Ligh etal. - Publisher: John Wiley & Sons; 1 edition (3 Oct. 2014) - ISBN-13: 978-1118825099
		B3)	Computer Forensics InfoSec Pro Guide - David Cowen - Publication Date: April 19, 2013 - ASIN: B00BPO7AP8
		B4)	Practical Forensic Imaging: Securing Digital Evidence with Linux Tools - Bruce Nikkel - Publisher: No Starch Press; 1 edition (1 Sept. 2016) - ASIN: B01M0TQZRY



Definitions:

--- What is Digital Forensics?
Digital/Computer Forensics:
     "Computer Forensics is the practice of determining the past
     actions that have taken place on a computer system using forensic
     techniques and understanding artifacts." - David Cowen, B3

     "Digital Forensics is "the preservation, recovery, analysis, and
     reporting of digital artifacts." - Andrew Hogg, T1

     "Digital Forensics is a branch of forensic science encompassing
     the recovery and investigation of material found in digital
     devices, often in relation to computer crime." - Wikipedia

What is an Artifact:
     "An Artifact is a reproducible file, setting or system change
     that occurs everytime an application or operating system performs
     a specific action" - David Cowen, B3

--- Forensic Process:
Digital Investigation:
     "A digital investigation is a process where we develop and test
     hypotheses that answer questions about digital events." - Brian
     Carrier, B1

Scientific Method:
     "[...]scientific method where we develop a hypothesis using
     evidence that we find and then test the hypothesis by looking for
     additional evidence that shows the hypothesis is impossible." -
     Brian Carrier, B1

Digital Evidence:
     "Digital evidence is a digital object that contains reliable
     information that supports or refutes a hypothesis." - Brian
     Carrier, B1

Digital Forensic Investigation:
     "A digital forensic investigation is a process that uses science
     and technology to analyze digital objects and that develops and
     tests theories, which can be entered into a court of law, to
     answer questions about events that occurred. In other words, a
     digital forensic investigation is a more restricted form of
     digital investigation." - Brian Carrier, B1


Digital Crime Scene Investigation Process - Brian Carrier:
	"The process has three major phases, which are system preservation, evidence searching, and event reconstruction." - Brian Carrier

	| System Preservation | <---> | Evidence Searching | <---> | Event Reconstruction |

	General Guidelines:
		PICL Stands for preservation, isolation, correlation, and logging.
		Preservation:	 Preservation of the system being investigated.
		Isolation:	 Isolate the analysis environment from both the suspect data and the outside world.
		Correlation:	 Correlate data with other independent sources. This helps reduce the risk of forged data.
		Logging:	 Log and document your actions. This helps identify what searches you have not yet conducted and what your results were.


Analysis Types:
	Live Analysis
	      "A live analysis occurs when you use the operating
	      system or other resources of the system being
	      investigated to find evidence." - Brian Carrier, B1

	 Dead Analysis:
	      "A dead analysis occurs when you are running
	      trusted applications in a trusted operating system to
	      find evidence." - Brian Carrier, B1



Aquisition Strategies:



Tools Available:
      Write Blockers: (Aquisition)
            Hardware or software devices that allow gathering of
      	    inforamation without damaging the contents by blocking
      	    write commands while allowing read commands to pass
      	    though.




What is a File System?
Definition:
File systems manage how data is stored and retrieved in a computer system. They consist of structural and user data which can be organised and understood by users and computers.

File System Categories:
Each files system contains elements from each of the following categores:
    File System: contains file system structure overview and where to find other strucutres and important data. (fsstat)
    Content: contains data relating to actual file contents, these are usualy organised into containers called data units (block/cluster).
    Metadata: data that descripes files such as access times, file size, users.
    File Name: contains the data that assigns a name to a file, is used by users instead of a metadata address.
    Application: special features/additional functionality such as quota data or journaling.

TODO: add to lecture
What is a volume?
    Logical Volume Address?
    Logical File System Address?

TODO: add to lecture
[ENTER SLIDES ON HOW EACH CATERGORIES OPERATES/Nesecary Background info on each category]

TODO: add to lecture
Content analysis techniques:
    data unit viewing - knowing where the evidence could be, but not what it is.
    logical file system-level searching: Looks for a specific value or phrase in a data unit - we know what the content is but not where
    data unit allocation status - extracting and analysing unallocated data in a file system
    Consistencey checks (for content): check all alloacated data units have 1 metadata entry, none = orphaned data 2=unusual not allowed in file systems.

TODO: add to lecture
Metadata analysis Techniques:
    Metadata Lookup - reading metadata structure inforamation (istat)
    Logical File Viewing - looking up the data units allocated from metadata and using content lookup to find contents of the file.
        In TSK, the icat tool allows you to view the contents of the data units that are allocated to a metadata structure. If the -s flag is given, the slack space is shown and the -r flag attempts to recover deleted files.
    Logical File Searching - searches data units allocated to a meta data entry
    Unallocated metadata analysis - listing unallocated metadata entries (ils)
    Metadata attribute searching and sorting - (ifind)

TODO: add to lecture
File Name Analysis Techniques:
    File Name Listing: list file and directories looking for data of interest, then investigating futher with metadata techniques like logical file viewing.
    File Name Searching: when dont know partial name info like file extention.

TODO: add to lecture
\subsection{File System Types} %ntfs, fat etc.


TODO: add to lecture
The Sleuth Kit (TSK) - http://www.sleuthkit.org/
tool overview: http://wiki.sleuthkit.org/index.php?title=TSK_Tool_Overview

The Sleuth Kit (TSK) is series of command line tools and a C library that
allows a user to analyse disk images and recover files.

TSK provides a series of tools for each of the file system categories mentioned above we will use a collection of the tools in the lab.


TODO: add to lecture
File System Layer Tools:
fsstat: shows file system details and statistics including layout, sizes and labels
% either swap to live demo or show annotated print screen explaining information shown
% give exmaple commands


TODO: add to lecture
File Name Tools
Allow for processing of file name structures.
ffind: finds allocated and unallocated file names that point to a given meta data structure
flsL lists allocated and deleted file names in a directory
% either swap to live demo or show annotated print screen explaining information shown
% give exmaple commands


TODO: add to lecture
Meta Data Layer Tools
icat: Extracts the data units of a file, which is specified by its meta data address.
ifind: Finds the meta data structure that has a given file name pointing to it or the meta data structure that points to a given data unit.
ils: Lists the meta data structures and their contents in a pipe delimited format.
istat: Displays the statistics and details about a given meta data structure in an easy to read format.
% either swap to live demo or show annotated print screen explaining information shown
% give exmaple commands


TODO: add to lecture
Data Unit Tools:
These file system tools process the data units where file content is stored.

blkcat: Extracts the contents of a given data unit.
blkls: Lists the details about data units and can extract the unallocated space of the file system.
blkstat: Displays the statistics about a given data unit in an easy to read format.
blkcalc: Calculates where data in the unallocated space image (from blkls) exists in the original image. This is used when evidence is found in unallocated space.
% either swap to live demo or show annotated print screen explaining information shown
% give exmaple commands


TODO: add to lecture
Volume System Tools:
These tools take a disk (or other media) image as input and analyze its partition structures. 

These can be used find hidden data between partitions and to identify the file system offset.

mmls: Displays the layout of a disk, including the unallocated spaces.
mmstat: Display details about a volume system (typically only the type).
mmcat: Extracts the contents of a specific volume to STDOUT.
% either swap to live demo or show annotated print screen explaining information shown
% give exmaple commands

